okay so this is the first lecture on
eigenvalues and eigenvectors and that's
a big subject that will take up most of
the rest of the course
it's a again matrices are square and
we're looking now for some special
numbers the eigenvalues and some special
vectors the eigenvectors and so this
lecture is mostly about what are these
numbers and then the other lectures are
how do we use them why do we want them
okay so what's an eigenvector maybe I'll
start with eigenvector what's an
eigenvector so I have a matrix a okay
what does a matrix do it acts on vectors
it multiplies vectors X so the way that
matrix a ax is in goes a vector X and
out comes uh vector ax is it's like a
function with a with a function in
calculus in goes a number X out comes f
of X here in linear algebra we're up in
more dimensions in goes a vector X out
comes a vector ax and the vectors I'm
specially interested in are the ones
that come out in the same direction that
they went in that won't be typical most
vectors ax is in points in some
different direction but there are
certain vectors where ax comes out
parallel to X and those are the eigen
vectors so ax parallel to X
those are the eigenvectors and what do I
mean by parallel Oh much easier to just
state it in an equation ax is some
multiple and everybody calls that
multiple lambda of X that's our big
equation we look for special vectors and
remember most vectors won't be
eigenvectors that for which ax is in the
same direction as X and by same
direction I allow it to be the very
opposite direction I allow lambda to be
negative or zero well I guess we've met
the eigen vectors that have eigenvalue
zero those are in the same direction but
they're in a kind of very special way so
the I get this this is the eigenvector x
lambda whatever this multiplying factor
is whether it's six or minus six or zero
or even some imaginary number
that's the eigenvalue so there's the
eigenvalue there's the eigenvector let's
just take a second on eigenvalue zero
from the point of view of eigenvalues
that's no special deal that that's we
have an eigenvector
if the eigenvalue happened to be zero
that would mean that ax was zero X in
other words zero
so what would X where would we look for
what are the X's what are the
eigenvectors with eigenvalue zero
they're the guys in the null space ax
equals zero so if our matrix is singular
so let me write this down if if a is
singular then
that what singular mean it means that it
takes some vector X into zero some
nonzero vector that's what all right
will be the eigenvector into 0 then
lambda equals 0 is an eigenvalue but
we're interested in all eigenvalues now
lambda equals 0 is not like so special
anymore okay so the question is how do
we find these X's and lambdas and notice
we don't have an equation ax equal B
anymore I can't use elimination I've got
the I've got two unknowns and in fact
they're multiplied together lambda and X
are both unknowns here so we need to we
need a good idea of how to find them but
before I before I do that and that's
where a determinate so come in can I
just give you some matrices like here
you go take the matrix a projection
matrix okay so suppose we have a plane
and our matrix P is what I've called a
now I'm gonna call it P for the moment
because it's I'm thinking okay let's
look at a projection matrix what are the
eigenvalues of a projection matrix so
that's my question what are the X's the
eigenvectors and the lambdas the
eigenvalues for and now let me say a
projection matrix
my point is that we before we get into
determinants and formulas and all that
stuff let's take some matrices where we
know what they do we know that if we
take a vector B what this matrix does is
it projects it's down to PB so is be an
eigenvector in in that picture is that
vector be an eigenvector no not so so B
is not an eigenvector because P be the
projection is in a different direction
so now tell me what vectors are
eigenvectors of P what vectors do get
projected in the same direction that
they start so so answer tell me some X's
in this picture where could I start with
a vector B or X do its projection and
end up in the same direction
well that would happen if the vector was
right in that plane already if the
vector X was so it let the vector X so X
any any vector any X in the plane will
be an eigen vector and and what will
happen when I multiply by P what I
project the vector X I I called it be
here because this is our familiar
picture but now I'm going to say that B
was no good for for our purposes I'm
interested in a vector X that's actually
in the plane and I project it and what
do I get back X of course doesn't move
so any X in the plane is unchanged by P
and and what's that telling me that's
telling me that x is an eigenvector and
it's all
so telling me what's the eigenvalue
which is just compare it with that the
eigen value of the multiplier is just
one good so we have actually a whole
plane of eigenvectors now I asked are
there any other eigenvectors and i
expect the answer to be yes because i
would like to get three if i'm in three
dimensions i would like to hope for
three independent eigenvectors two of
them in the plane and one not in the
plane okay so this guy B that I drew
there was not any good what's the right
eigenvector that's not in the plane the
good one is the one that's perpendicular
to the plane there's an another good X
because what's the projection so that
these are eigenvectors another guy here
would be another eigenvector but now
here's another one any X that's
perpendicular to the plane what's px for
that for that vector what's the
projection of this guy perpendicular the
plane it is zero of course so it's it
there's the null space px and note for
those guys are 0 or 0 X if we like and
the eigen value is 0 so my answer to the
question is what are the eigen values
for our projection matrix there they are
1 and 0 ok we've we know projection
matrices we can write them down as that
a a transpose a inverse a transpose
thing but without doing that from the
from the picture we can see what are the
eigen vectors okay are there other
matrices let me take a second example
how about a permutation matrix what
about the matrix I'll call it a now
zero one one zero can you tell me a
vector X see we'll have a system soon
enough so I would like to just do these
these couple of examples just to see the
picture before we before we let it all
go into a system where that matrix isn't
anything special because it is special
and what so what vector could I multiply
by and end up in the same direction can
you spot an eigenvector for this guy it
that that's a matrix that permutes x1
and x2 right it switches the first the
two components of X how could the vector
with its X 2 X 1 with per muted turn out
to be a multiple of x1 x2 the vector we
start with can you tell me an
eigenvector here for this guy X equal
what is actually can you tell me one
vector that has eigenvalue 1 so what
what vector would have eigenvalue 1 so
that if i if i permute it it doesn't
change there that could be 1 1 thanks 1
1 okay take that vector 1 1 that will be
an eigenvector because if i do ax i get
1 1 so that's the eigenvalue is 1
great that's one eigenvalue but I have
here a 2 by 2 matrix and I figure
there's going to be a second eigenvalue
and eigenvector now what about that
what's a vector ok maybe we can just
like guess it a vector that the other
actually this one
that I'm thinking of it's going to be a
vector that has eigenvalue minus one
that's my that's going to be my other
eigenvalue for this matrix that's the
notice the nice positive or not negative
matrix but an eigenvalue is going to
come out negative and can you guess
spot the X that will work for that so I
want a vector when I multiply by a which
reverses the two components I want the
thing to come out minus the original so
what shall I send in in that case if I
send in negative 1 1 then when I apply a
I get I do that multiplication and I get
1 negative 1 so it reversed sign so ax
is minus X lambda is minus 1 aah so ax
was X there and ax is minus X here can I
just mention like jump ahead and point
out a special little fact about
eigenvalues n by n matrices will have n
eigenvalues and it's not like that
suppose n is 3 or 4 or more it's not so
easy to find them we'd have a third
degree or a fourth degree or an nth
degree equation but here's one nice fact
there's one pleasant fact that the sum
of the eigenvalues equals the sum down
the diagonal that's called the trace and
I put that in the lecture content
specifically so this is a neat fact a
fact that some the some of the lambdas
add up the lambdas equals there's some
what would you like me to household I
write that down what I want to say in
words is the sum down the diagonal of a
shall I write a 1 1 plus a 2 2 plus plus
a in in that's add up the diagonal
entries in this example it's 0 in other
words once I found this eigen value of 1
I knew the other one had to be minus 1
in this 2 by 2 case because in the 2 by
2 case which is a good one to to play
with the trace tells you right away what
the other eigen value is so if I tell
you 1 eigen value you could tell me the
other one will we'll have that we'll see
that again ok now can i I could give
more examples but maybe it's time to
face the the equation ax equal lambda X
and figure how are we going to find X
and lambda ok so this is the question
now is how to find eigenvalues and
eigenvectors how to solve how to solve
ax equal lambda X when we've got two
unknowns both in the equations ok here's
the trick simple idea bring this on to
the same side
rewrite bring this over as a minus
lambda times the identity x equals 0
right I have a X minus lambda X so I
brought that over and I've got 0 left on
the on the right hand side ok
I don't know lambda and I don't know X
but I do know something here what I know
is if I if I'm going to be able to solve
this thing for some X that's not the
zero vector that's no that's a useless
eigenvector doesn't count what I know
now is that this matrix must be what if
I'm going to be if there is an X I don't
care if I don't right now I don't know
what it is I'm going to find lambda
first actually and but if there is an X
it tells me that this matrix this
special combination which is like the
matrix a with lambda shifted by lambda
shifted by lambda I that it has to be
singular this matrix must be singular
otherwise the only X would be the zero X
and zero interest okay so this is
singular and what do I now know about
singular matrices they're determinant is
zero so I so from the fact that that has
to be singular I know that the
determinant of a minus lambda I has to
be zero and that now I've got X out of
it
I've got an equation for lambda that the
key equation it's called the
characteristic equation or the
eigenvalue equation and that in other
words I I'm now in a position to find
lambda first so I this is the idea will
be to find lambda first and actually
I'll know I won't find one lambda I'll
find n different lambdas well and
lambdas maybe not in different ones a
lambda could be repeated repeated lambda
is
the source of all trouble in 1806 so
let's hope for the moment that they're
not repeated they're there they were
different right one and minus one in
that in that for that permutation okay
so and after I found this lambda can I
just look ahead how am I going to find X
after I have found this lambda the
lambda being this one of the numbers
that makes this matrix singular then of
course finding X is just by elimination
right it's just now I've got a singular
matrix I'm looking for the null space
we're experts at finding the null space
you know you do elimination you identify
the the pivot columns and so on you and
give values to the free variables
probably there only be one free variable
will give it the value one like there
and we find the other variable okay so
let's find the X second will be a doable
job let's go let's look at the first job
of finding lambda okay can I take
another example and let's let's work
that one out
okay so let me take the example say let
me make it easy three three one and one
so I've made it easy I made it - by - I
made it symmetric and I even made it
constant down the diagonal so that so
the more like special properties I stick
into the matrix the more special outcome
I get for the eigenvalues for example
that this symmetric matrix I know that
it'll come out with
real eigenvalues the eigenvalues will
turn out to be nice real numbers and up
in our previous example that was a
symmetric matrix yeah actually while
we're at it
that was a symmetric matrix its
eigenvalues were nice real numbers 1 and
minus 1 and you notice anything about
its eigenvectors anything particular
about those two vectors 1 1 and -1 1
they just happen to be no I can't say
they just happened to be because that's
a whole point is that they had to be
what what are they they're perpendicular
the vector when if I see a vector 1 1
and a 1 and a minus 1 1 my mind
immediately takes that dot product it's
0 those vectors are perpendicular
that'll happen here too well let's find
the eigenvalues actually the I owe my
examples too easy my example is too easy
let me tell you in advance what's going
to happen may I
or shall I do the determinant of a minus
lambda and then point out at the end
what will you remind me at the after I
found the eigenvalues to say why they
were why why they were easy from the
from the example we did okay let's let's
do the job here let's fake let's compute
determinant of a minus lambda I so
that's a determinant and what's what is
this thing it's the matrix a with lambda
removed from the diagonal so the
diagonal matrix is shifted and then I'm
taking the determinant okay so I
multiply this out so what is that
determinant you notice I didn't take
lambda away from all the entries its
lambda I so it slammed along the
diagonal so I get three much
lambda squared and then minus 1 right
and I want that to be 0 well I'm gonna
simplify it and what will I get so if I
multiply this out I get lambda squared
minus 6 lambda plus what plus 8 and that
I'm going to set to 0 and I'm going to
solve it so and it's it's a quadratic
equation I can use factorization I can
use the quadratic formula I'll get two
lambdas before I do it
tell me what's that number six that's
showing up in this equation
it's a trace that number six is three
plus three and while we're at it
what's the number eight that's showing
up in this equation it's the determinant
that our matrix has determined at eight
so in a 2x2 case it's really nice it's
lambda squared minus the trace times
lambda the trace is the linear
coefficient at plus the determinate the
constant term okay so let's can can we
find the roots I guess the easy way is
to factor that as something times
something if we couldn't factor it then
we'd have to use the old b squared minus
4ac formula but I think we can factor
that into lambda minus what times lambda
minus what can you do that factorization
for and to lambda minus four times
lambda minus two so that the eigenvalues
are four and two so the eigenvalues are
one eigenvalue lambda one let's say is
four lambda to the other eigenvalue is
two
the eigenvalues are 4 & 2 and then I can
go for the eigenvectors you see I got
the eigenvalues first 4 & 2
now for the eigenvectors so what are the
eigenvectors they're these guys in the
null space when I take away when I make
the matrix singular by taking 4i or to
Iowa so we got to do those separately
let me find the eigenvector for for
first so I'll subtract 4 so a minus 4i
is so taking 4 away we'll put minus ones
there and what's the point about that
matrix if 4 is an eigenvalue then a
minus 4 I had better be out what kind of
matrix singular if that matrix isn't
singular the 4 wasn't correct but we're
okay that matrix is singular and what's
the X now the X is in the null space so
what's the x1 that goes with with the
lambda 1 so that aim so this is now I'm
doing ax 1 is lambda 1 X 1 so I took a
minus lambda 1 I that's this matrix and
now I'm looking for the X 1 in its null
space and who who is he
what's the vector X in the null space of
course it's 1 1 so that's the
eigenvector that goes with that
eigenvalue now how about the eigenvector
that goes with the other eigenvalue can
I do that with with erasing I take a
minus 2 I so now I take 2 away from the
diagonal and that leaves me with a 1 and
a 1 so a minus 2 I as again produced a
singular matrix as it had to I'm looking
for the null space of that guy what
vector is in its null space well
of course a whole line of vectors so
when I say the eigenvector I'm not
speaking correctly there's a whole line
of eigenvectors and you just I just want
a basis and for a line I just want one
vector but you could your there's some
freedom in choosing that one but choose
a reasonable one
what's a vector in the null space of
that well the natural vector to pick as
the eigenvector with with lambda 2 is
minus 1 1 if I did elimination on that
vector and set that the free variable to
be 1 I would get minus 1 and get that
eigen vector so do you see then that
I've got I can backfire eigenvalue
eigenvector eigenvalue for this for this
matrix and now becomes that thing that i
wanted to be reminded of what's the
relation between that problem and let me
write just above what we found here a
equals 0 1 1 0 that has eigenvalues 1
and minus 1 and eigenvectors 1 1 and
eigenvector minus 1 1 and what do you
notice what's how is this matrix related
to that matrix
how are those 2 matrices related well 1
is just 3i more than the other one right
I just took that matrix and I I took
this matrix and I added 3i so my
question is what happened to the
eigenvalues and what happened to the
eigenvectors that's the that's like the
question we keep asking now in this
chapter if I if I do something to the
Mae
Trix what happens if I already know
something about the matrix what what's
the conclusion for its eigenvectors and
eigenvalues because those eigenvalues
and eigenvectors are going to tell us
important information about the matrix
and here what are we what are we seeing
what's happening to these eigenvalues 1
and minus 1 when I add 3 I it just added
3 to the eigenvalues I got 4 & 2 3 more
than 1 and minus 1 what happened to the
eigenvectors nothing at all 1 1 is + - +
1 and minus 1 1 are is still the
eigenvectors in other words simple but
useful observation if I add 3i to a
matrix its eigenvectors don't change and
its eigenvalues are 3 bigger let's let's
just see why let me keep all this on the
same board suppose I have a matrix a and
ax equal lambda X now I add 3i to that
matrix do you see what its eigenvalue
are the eigenvalues and eigenvectors are
going to how they're coming out if so is
there's an if ax equals lambda X then
this this other new matrix I just have
an ax which is lambda X and I have a 3x
from the 3x so it's just I mean it's
just sitting there lambda plus 3x so if
they if this had eigenvalue lambda this
size eigenvalue lambda plus 3 and the X
the eigenvector is the same X for both
matrices okay so that's a great
of course it's special we got the new
matrix by adding three I suppose I had
added another matrix suppose I know the
eigenvalues and eigenvectors of a so
this is this this little board here is
going to be not so great
suppose I have a matrix a and it has an
eigen vector X with an eigen value
lambda and now I add on some other
matrix so so what I'm asking you is if
you know the eigenvalues of a and you
know the eigenvalues of B let me say
suppose B so this is if let me put an if
here if ax equals lambda X fine and B
has eigen values has eigen values what
should we call them alpha alpha 1 and
alpha or say alpha I'll use alpha for
the eigen values of B for no good reason
well you see what I'm gonna ask is how
about a plus B let me let me give you
the let me give you a what you might
think first okay if ax equals lambda X
and if B has an eigen value alpha then
am I allowed to say what's what's the
matter with this argument it's wrong
what I'm gonna write up is wrong I'm
gonna say BX is Alpha X add those up and
you get a plus BX equals lambda plus
Alpha X so you would think that if you
knew the eigen values of a and you knew
the eigen values of B then if you added
you would know the eigen values of a
plus B
but that's false a plus B what when B
was 3i that work worked great but this
is not so great and what's the matter
with that argument there we have no
reason to believe that X is also an
eigenvector of B it B has some
eigenvalues but it's got some different
eigenvectors normally it's a different
matrix I don't know anything special if
I don't know anything special then as
far as I know it's got some different
eigen vector Y and when I add I get just
rubbish I mean I get I can add but I
don't learn anything so not so great is
a plus B or a times B normally the
eigenvalues of a plus B or a times B are
not eigenvalues of a plus eigenvalues of
b eigenvalues are not like linear or and
they don't multiply because eigenvectors
are usually different and and there's
this no way to find out what a plus B
does to a vector okay so that's like a
caution don't if B is a multiple of the
identity great but if B is some general
matrix then for a plus B you've got to
find you've got to solve the eigenvalue
problem okay now I want to do another
example that brings out another point
about eigenvalues let me make this
example a rotation matrix
okay so here's another example
so a rotate oh I better call it Q I
often use Q for four rotations because
those are the like very special very
important examples of orthogonal
matrices let me let me make it a 90
degree rotation so that by my matrix is
going to be the one that rotates every
vector by 90 degrees so do you remember
that matrix it's the cosine of 90
degrees which is zero the sine of 90
degrees which is one minus the sine of
90 the cosine of 90 so that matrix
deserves the letter Q it's an orthogonal
matrix very very orthogonal matrix now
I'm interested in its eigenvalues and
eigenvectors two-by-two it can't be that
tough
we know that the eigenvalues add to zero
actually we know something already here
the eigen what's the sum of the two
eigenvalues just tell me what I just
said zero right from that trace business
the sum of the eigenvalues is is going
to come out zero and the product of the
eigenvalues did I tell you about the
determinant being the product of the
eigenvalues no but that's a good thing
to know we pointed out that how that
eight appeared in the in the quadratic
equation so so so let me just say this
the trace is zero plus zero obviously
and that's the sum that's lambda 1 plus
lambda 2
now the other neat fact is that the
determinant what's the determinant of
that matrix 1 and that is lambda 1 times
lambda 2 in our example the one we
worked out we the eigenvalues came out
four and two their product was eight
that it had to be eight because we
factored into lambda minus four times
lambda minus two that gave us the
constant term eight and that was the
determinant okay what I'm leading up to
with this example is that something's
gonna go wrong something goes wrong for
a rotation because what vector can come
out parallel to itself after a rotation
if if this matrix rotates every vector
by 90 degrees what could be an
eigenvector you see we're going to have
trouble I can vectors are well our
picture of eigenvectors of coming out in
the same direction that they went in
there won't be any and with and with
eigenvalues we're gonna have trouble
from these equations let's see why am I
expecting trouble the the first equation
says that the eigenvalues add to 0 so
there's a plus and a minus but then the
second equation says that the product is
plus 1 and we're in trouble but there's
a way out so how let's do the usual
stuff look at determinant of Q minus
lambda I it'll it'll so I'll just follow
the rules take the determinant subtract
lambda from the diagonal where I had
zeros the
rest is the same rest of Q is just
copied compute that determinant okay so
what does that determine it equal lambda
squared minus -1 plus 1 what's up
there's my equation like my equation for
the eigenvalues is lambda squared plus 1
equals 0 what are the eigenvalues lambda
1 and lambda 2 there I whatever that is
and minus it right those are the right
numbers they add to 0 as the trace
requires and they multiply to 1 as the
determinant requires but they don't
happen to be real numbers even though
the matrix was perfectly real so this
can happen complex numbers are going to
have to enter 1806 at this moment boo
right all right if I just choose good
matrices that have real eigenvalues we
can postpone that evil day but just so
you see so I'll try to do that but it's
it's out there that a matrix a perfectly
real matrix could have get give a
perfectly innocent looking quadratic
thing but the roots of that quadratic
can be complex numbers and and of course
you everybody knows that there what do
you know about the complex numbers so so
now let's just spend one more minute on
this bad possibility of complex numbers
we do know a little information about
the the two complex numbers they're
complex conjugates of each other
if if lambda is an eigenvalue then when
I change when I go you remember what
complex conjugates are you switch the
sign of the imaginary part well this was
only imaginary had no real part so we
just switched its side so the
eigenvalues come in pairs like that but
they're complex a complex conjugate pair
and that can happen with a perfectly
real matrix and as a matter of fact so
that was Mike my point earlier that if
the matrix was symmetric it wouldn't
happen so if we stick to matrices that
are symmetric or like close to symmetric
then the eigenvalues will stay real but
if we move far away from symmetric and
that's as far as you can move because
that matrix is how is Q transpose
related to Q for that matrix that matrix
is anti-symmetric q transpose is minus q
that's the very opposite of symmetry
when I flip across the diagonal I get I
reverse all the signs those are the guys
that have pure imaginary eigenvalues so
they're the extreme case and in between
our matrices that are not symmetric or
anti-symmetric but but they have partly
a symmetric part and an anti-symmetric
part okay so I'm doing a bunch of
examples here to show the possibilities
the good possibilities being
perpendicular eigenvectors real
eigenvalues the bad possibilities being
complex eigenvalues we could say that's
bad there's another even worse I'm
getting through the bad things here
today then then the next lecture can can
can be like pure happiness okay here's
one more bad thing that that could
happen so again I'll do it with an
example suppose my matrix is suppose I
take this three three one and I change
that guy to zero what are the
eigenvalues of that matrix what are the
eigenvectors this is always our question
of course the next sections are going to
show why why or why do we care but but
for the moment this lecture is
introducing them and let's just find
them okay what are the eigenvalues of
that matrix let me tell you I at a
glance we could answer that question
because the matrix is triangular it's
really useful to know if you've got
properties like a triangular matrix it's
very useful to know you can read the
eigenvalues off there right on the
diagonal so the eigenvalue is 3 and also
3 3 is a repeated eigenvalue but let's
see that happen let me do it right the
determinant of a minus lambda I what I
always have to do is this determinate I
take away lambda from the diagonal I
leave the rest I compute the determinant
so I get a 3 minus lambda times a 3
minus lambda and nothing so that's where
the triangular part came in triangular
part the one thing we know about
triangular matrices is the determinate
is just the product down the diagonal
and in this case it's this thing
repeated so lambda 1 is 1 sorry lambda 1
is 3 and lambda 2 is 3 that was easy
I mean no why why should I be
pessimistic about a matrix whose
eigenvalues can be read off right away
the problem with this matrix is in the
eigenvectors so let's go to the
eigenvectors so how do i find the
eigenvectors I'm looking for a couple of
eigenvectors so I take the eigenvalue
well what do I do now we remember I
solve a minus lambda IX equals zero and
and what is a minus lambda IX so so take
three away and I get this matrix zero
zero zero one right times X is supposed
to give me zero right that's my big
equation for x now I'm looking for X the
eigenvector so I took a minus lambda IX
and what kind of a matrix am I supposed
to have here singular right
it's supposed to be singular and then
it's got some vectors which it is so
it's got some vector X in the null space
and what what's the what's to give me a
basis for the null space for that guy
tell me what's what's a vector X in the
null space so that'll be the the
eigenvector that goes with lambda 1
equal 3 the eigenvector is so what's in
the null space 1 0 is it great now
what's the other eigenvector what's
what's the eigenvector that goes with
lambda 2
well lambda 2 is 3 again so I've got the
same thing again give me another vector
I want it to be independent if I'm going
to write down an x2 I'm never going to
let it be dependent on x1 I'm looking
for independent eigenvectors and what's
the conclusion
there isn't one this is a degenerate
matrix it's only got one line of
eigenvectors instead of two it's it's
the this possibility of a repeated
eigenvalue opens this further
possibility of a shortage of
eigenvectors and so there's no second
independent eigenvector x 2 so it's a
matrix it's a two-by-two matrix but with
only one independent eigenvector so that
will be those are the matrices that
where eigenvectors are or don't give the
complete story ok my lecture on Monday
will give the complete story for all the
other matrices thanks have a good
weekend a real New England weekend